Today, we're going to be in Exodus 32.
So if you have your Bibles or your electronic devices, turn to Exodus 32.
Today is a really simple, straightforward message about idolatry, right?
Yeah, I know it's great.
And so what I want you to do is kind of prepare your heart and your mind and ask God
Just for a moment, God clear everything out of my heart, clear the things out of my mind, the things I have to do later today, the things that I have coming up this week and let me just focus on you and what it is that you have for me and what it is that I have to learn about idolatry and then are there any idols in my life that I need to get rid of because they're subtle.
They take you by surprise.
I heard about this man that went to the dentist
to schedule getting a tooth pulled.
And he comes in the dentist's office and he says, look, doc, I don't have a lot of money.
Is there any way you can make this procedure cheaper?
The dentist says, well, I suppose for a small discount, we could reuse some of the disposable tools.
Gross.
It might slightly increase your risk of infection, but theoretically, you should be fine.
The man says, well, that sounds good, but is there anything you could do to bring the price down even more?
The dentist says, well, I just hired a new hygienist.
And he's really green, and he's really impatient.
But if we let him practice on you there, that'll save me from him having to ruin another set of practice teeth.
He says, great, is there anything else you can do for me?
The dentist shakes his head, and he says, no, the only thing would be to leave out the painkillers.
But he said, without those, the procedure will be extremely painful.
It would just be absolutely even potentially unbearable.
Please serve the man said, I'm destitute.
I'll do whatever I can do to make this as cheap as possible.
The dentist says, okay, well, if that's what you want, that's what we'll do.
So he says, I have an opening tomorrow morning at nine 30.
If you're ready, he said, can I have a name for the appointment?
And he said, well, my wife's name is Rhonda.
And she said, I'll have her.
I'll have her here tomorrow morning at night.
Oh, so idols can be subtle, right?
You can think, you know what's going on, but then God reveals something to you.
And there's a twist in the story, right?
So let's pick up and read in Exodus chapter 32.
And this is a real simple passage of scripture that's
Really straightforward, it's a tragic story, but it also has some humor in the story.
In Exodus 32, one through two, it says, when the people saw that Moses was so long and coming down from the mountain, they gathered around Aaron and said, come, make us gods who will go up before us, who will go before us.
As for this fellow Moses who brought us up out of Egypt, we don't know what has happened to him.
So they're already kind of saying, you know, that guy Moses, he disappeared.
And now the thing that's important to understand here is that they associated Moses with the presence of God, right?
With the staff that he was holding up high and all these things, they associated Moses with God's presence.
And so when Moses is gone, after a certain period of time, they start to think that the presence of God is also gone.
And that's, that's the context you need to understand this passage.
So Aaron said to them, answered them and he said, take off the gold earrings that your wives, your sons and your daughters are wearing and bring them to me.
So all the people took off all their ear, took off their earrings and brought them to Aaron.
The verses five through eight, it says, when Aaron saw this, he built an altar in front of the calf.
and announce tomorrow there will be a festival to the Lord.
Now that's a really, you know, again, that is, it seems, you know, somewhat insignificant, but when he uses that word Lord there, he uses the covenant name for God.
And that makes it doubly bad, right?
He's saying this calf, but then he uses the covenant name for God that was his name alone.
So the next day, the people rose early and sacrificed to burn offerings and presented fellowship offerings.
Afterward, they sat down to eat and drink and God up to indulge in revelry.
So they have a big party.
Then the Lord says to Moses, go down because your people whom you brought up out of Egypt have become corrupt.
So God sees them at this point.
They have been quick, I would say, to turn away from what I commanded them
and have made themselves an idol cast in the shape of a calf.
They have bowed down to it and sacrificed to it and have said, these are your gods Israel who brought you up out of Egypt.
I mean, this is absolute blasphemy, right?
They're already saying that they built this golden calf and now they're giving the calf credit for bringing them out of Israel when they know that it was God who had done it.
Down in verse 11, it says, but Moses sought the favor of the Lord, his God.
Lord, he said, why should your anger burn against your people whom you brought out of Egypt with great power and a mighty hand?
Why should the Egyptians say it was with evil intent that he brought them out to kill them in the mountains and to wipe them off the face of the earth?
Turn from your fierce anger, relent and do not bring disaster on your people.
And so Moses,
as an intercessor, right?
Moses is a type of Jesus.
He's not Jesus, but he is a precursor to Jesus.
And we see this here because he's interceding for the people, just like Jesus intercedes at the right hand of God for you and me today.
And he reminds God that they're his people, that he has promised them, and that God, he says, God, but you know, basically because of your great character, because of your great name, because you are God,
I know that you will do what it is that you have said, that you will do, which is really the definition of faith.
In verse 13, he says, remember your servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, to whom you swore by your own self.
I will make your descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky, and I will give your descendants all this land, I promise them, and it will be their inheritance forever.
Then the Lord relented and did not bring honest people
the disaster that he had threatened.
Then the down and verses 19 through 21, it says, when Moses approached the camp and saw the calf and the dancing, his anger burned.
And he threw the tablets out of his hands, breaking them to pieces at the foot of the mountain.
You know, it's interesting that, you know, this story is really, why did he break those tablets, right?
I mean, you think about,
This, this were given to him by God and he comes down and he's so angry that he breaks the tablets.
Somebody said this morning, you know, that this is the crazy part of the story.
Like if God gave you something, you'd be really, try to be really careful not to break it, right?
But here Moses, maybe it, because he has a difficulty with impulse control, just throws that thing down there and breaks the tablets anyway.
And he took the calf that people had made and burned it in the fire.
Then he ground it to powder, scattered it on the water and made the Israelites drink it.
He said to Aaron, what did these people do to you that you led them into such great sin?
Then in verse 22, it says, do not be angry, my Lord, Aaron answered.
You know how prone these people are to evil.
I mean, this is a great display of passing the buck.
You know how prone these people are to evil?
They said to me, make us gods who will go before us.
As for the spell of Moses who brought us up out of Egypt, we don't know what happened to him.
So I told them whoever has any gold jewelry take it off.
Then they gave me the gold.
I threw it in the fire and out came a calf.
I mean, it's an absolutely preposterous story, right?
It's something that you think you might hear from a kindergartener.
or whatever.
Oh, Moses, you know, people didn't know what happened to you.
You left.
We thought the presence of God had left us.
So we took up all the earrings.
We took up kind of a collection and we got all this gold jewelry and then we threw it in the fire and what do you know?
Out came a calf.
You know, a lot of times in our culture today, idols are often seen and displayed as fantasy.
You know, that here we have Indiana Jones, right?
And he gets in there and he gets in that cave.
And he sees this gold figurine and he wants to take that thing.
And a lot of us think that way.
A lot of us think that idolatry is reserved for those uncontacted or uneducated tribes that carve out statues of stone and worship them or something like that.
But the truth is,
that our culture today in a modern context has at least as many idols as they had in those days is simply that we don't make generally in America at least necessarily graven images out of them but nonetheless they still sit on the throne of our hearts.
Martin Luther who was one of the fathers of the Protestant Reformation said this about the Ten Commandments.
He said that
It's really interesting because the first two commandments deal with idolatry.
The first one is don't have any other gods before me.
The second one is don't make carved images of other gods and worship them and serve them.
And so what Luther said is that the key to not breaking the other eight is that you don't break the first two.
Because if you break the first two, you're bound to break the other eight.
because you've taken God off the throne of your life.
And so what Luther is saying is if you steal, if you dishonor your parents, right, if you envy your neighbor and all that they have or all that they achieve, he says that in those moments that you're placing something else of greater importance on your heart and on your life, then God, something else he says is sitting on the throne there.
You know, people a long time ago, we see here this golden idol in the Raiders of the Lost Ark, and that's an awesome movie.
And we often adopt this mindset of, well, I don't worship idols because of the fantasy in our culture, but what is idolatry?
How do we define idolatry?
Simple, right?
Idolatry is valuing something more than you value God.
It's a real easy,
definition.
It's a real subtle thing to identify in your own life though and to get rid of in your own life through the power of the Spirit.
Even though it's a simple definition, it can be a really hard thing for us to deal with in our lives and it can have such a corrosive effect on everything around us.
All of our relationships, our work, you know, the things we do for hobbies, the things that we enjoy,
You know, our marriages, our families, it can have a really terrible effect on all of it.
So John Calvin is, you know, pretty famous in theological circles.
And he said in his book, The Institutes of the Christian Religion that the human heart is a perpetual idol factory.
And that means simply that we just crank out idols one after the other, after the other.
And what makes them so harmful and so sly
And so cunning and so deceitful is that oftentimes they're not bad things.
They can be good things, just not put in their proper place, right?
They take the place of God.
They dethrone Him in our hearts.
And oftentimes it's without us even realizing it.
Timothy Keller said in counterfeit gods,
We think that idols are bad things, but that is almost never the case.
The greater the good, the more likely we are to expect that it can satisfy our deepest needs and hopes.
Anything can serve as a counterfeit God, especially the very best things in life.
I mean, that's a real interesting take, right?
Because we're taught from the time that we start off in Sunday school,
We're taught about idolatry.
We're taught that we should avoid idols.
We're taught that we need to get rid of idols and we see idols as such bad things.
And that's where Satan is so good.
And he's oftentimes so deceptive is that he gets us focused on bad things and the bad things can be the idols.
And then Satan comes in and says, well, I'm going to fool this person with good things and they'll make an idol out of some good things.
You know, people make idols out.
We're going to talk about some surface idols here in just a second.
But it's a shame, right?
When we worship the gifts rather than the giver.
And so what makes an idol?
Well, there's four things I think that make an idol.
The first thing is that it reflects the culture that you live in, right?
The Israelites were well acquainted with the idol of a calf.
They understood a golden calf.
They had been for hundreds of years.
They had been in captivity in Egypt, held as slaves.
And the Egyptians worshipped golden calves among other gods.
I have a book in my office called a list.
It's called a dictionary of Egyptian gods.
And that thing is this thick.
I mean, they worshipped all kinds of gods.
And so the image of the calf was not far removed from their life in Egypt.
And they immediately turned their attention to that which they knew because they thought that God had forsaken them.
Remember, I talked about how the key to this passage is to understand that the Israelites associated the presence of God with Moses' presence.
When Moses is up on Mount Sinai for weeks, they start to think, A, this guy's not coming back, and therefore God is not coming back.
Right?
Can you imagine you've got two to three million people who all of a sudden feel like our leader and the person who brings God to us and the reason that we have victory and the reason that, you know, there's been some miraculous things, lots of miraculous things that have happened in the past for us is because of Moses and because God works through Moses as a mediator, but now that Moses is gone, God's gone.
And therefore, what are we going to do?
What are we gonna do if God's presence is not with us?
And so they start to think, well, what other kind of gods can we worship?
Right?
They're trying that we're gonna get to the deep roots of idolatry in a minute, but essentially they're just trying to cover their basis.
They're saying, you know, if this Moses guy happens to come back from Mount Sinai and he has God with him, they don't expect that to happen, but they think, oh, that's great.
But in the meantime, while he's gone,
you know, doing whatever he's doing, let's build some other stuff so that if the Egyptian gods or gods will worship them, and if God is God, then we'll worship him.
They were trying to have it both ways.
You see this with the picture of Mount Carmel or with Elijah, right?
Where, you know, Elijah says, listen, if God is God worship him, if Bell is God worship him, and the central question in that story is who is going to bring the rain?
which is who is going to provide for me, who is going to make sure I have food on my table, who is going to make sure my crops grow.
And they were simply trying to cover their basis by saying, I'm going to have bail, I'm going to worship him in case he's the one that brings the rain, because this is what their neighbors say, right?
And then I'll worship Jehovah if he's the one that brings the rain.
And instead, we know what happened in that story.
But the image of the calf is not far
removed.
And so you don't have to look far in your life or my life to find that the idols that we struggle with are probably things that we're familiar with.
We turn to familiar to fill our needs.
And that's what makes it an idol.
With idolatry, you and I become like people who don't know God.
Jesus said eternal life is this, knowing God.
And when we turn to idolatry, we become like people who have rejected eternal life, even though we have it.
And it's guaranteed to us through the spirit because we act like people who don't know God.
But as Christians and any person were really good at obscuring it enough and taking it in in just a small enough amounts so that we think we can get away with it and build an acceptable idol.
And so that's the first thing.
The second is that idols are often repetitive in nature.
And we find that when stress or crisis or boredom creeps into our lives, then we're driven back to whatever that thing is over and over and over again.
And that becomes repetitive in nature.
We go back to the same well over and over and over again.
chapter 32 verses 4 through 6.
He says, he took what they had handed him and made it into an idol, cast in the shape of a calf, fashioning it with a tool.
Then they said, these are your gods, Israel, who brought you out of Egypt.
When Aaron saw this, he built an altar in front of the calf and announced, tomorrow there will be a festival to the Lord.
So the next day the people rose early and sacrificed burnt offerings
and presented fellowship offerings afterward, they sat down to eat and drink and got up to indulge in revelry.
And so they went back to something that they knew.
They went back to something that was familiar because they were desperate for power, they were desperate for provision.
And they turned and they looked in the wrong direction.
And a lot of times that can happen to us, man.
When crisis, when crisis points come into our lives, it's so easy for us
to turn back to the familiar.
I know that I've done it.
I continue to do it from time to time, and I'm sure you do as well.
You pick up that thing that helps with the pain, right?
And this is what happens here.
In verse eight of chapter two tells us that God's voice of punishment on the people, he said, they are quick to turn aside from me and quick to worship another God.
Because idols obscure
who God is, right?
And that's why they're so incredibly dangerous.
That's why Jesus said in Matthew chapter six, verses 22 through 24, he says, do not store up for yourself treasures on earth, but store up for yourself treasures in heaven for where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
And then he used that same idea of the heart as the center of us,
And he says, if your eye is healthy, your whole body will be full of light.
But if your eye is unhealthy, your whole body will be full of darkness.
And he goes on to talk about no one can serve two masters because you will grow to love one and hate the other.
You cannot serve God and wealth.
What does Jesus say in there?
He's saying,
and idol obscures who I am.
It makes you forget who I am.
It makes you forget what I've done for you.
It makes you forget my character.
It makes you place your faith in something that will ultimately fail you rather than something that is good for you, that's something that cannot fail, which is Jesus.
Idols compete for our attention and then they obscure our view.
So how can I tell if something is obscuring and competing for God's attention in my life?
Well, it's simple.
I give it my attention, time, and money.
I build an altar to it, and I sacrifice the very best part of who I am to this thing.
The Old Testament is very clear that in the sacrificial system that the children of Israel were supposed to let the very best to bring the very best animal to God.
We talked about that when we talked about the prophet Malachi, that they were bringing diseased animals, and God said, look, I reject your worship.
And here, the sacrificial system is set up to bring the best animal that was pure and perfect.
And when I turn my attention to an idol, something other than God, and I give it the best of who I am, that tells me that it is obscuring and competing.
in my relationship with the Lord, if I give it the best of who I am.
Ezekiel has some really striking language about idolatry.
In Ezekiel chapter 16, verse 32, he says, you adulterous wife, you prefer strangers to your own husband.
All prostitutes receives gifts, but you give gifts to all your lovers.
I mean, that is devastating.
He says, bribing them to come to you from everywhere for your illicit favors.
So something is an idol that we give as a gift to someone other than God and it obscures him.
The fourth thing is to understand what makes something an idol is that it moves out of the arena of just something that we have in our lives.
into something that eventually takes over our lives and we protect it with rationalizations and excuses.
It's always protected with rationalizations and excuses.
Listen to what Aaron said when Moses confronted him on what he had done.
In verse 22, Aaron said, do not let your anger burn against me.
You know the people, they're bent on evil.
They made me do it, Moses.
I didn't want to do it.
And then verse 24, he says, I took the gold and threw it in the fire and wow, out came this calf.
And as we talked about, that's a ludicrous story.
We laugh at it, but the truth is that our own idols can be wrapped in just as crazy a narrative as this story that Aaron tells Moses, right?
That it's not believable.
When our kids were little and sometimes they would tell me a story that was just so fantastic that I knew that there was no chance that that stored that
thing ever actually happened, I would tell them, and I'd be careful about telling somebody that in public, because you'll look like a nut, right?
I mean, nobody's buying what you're selling there, chief, you know.
And here is the same kind of thing.
It's a ludicrous story, but it's still wrapped in rationalization and excuse.
And so think about those four things.
that make an idol as we think about what are some idols that we deal with today.
And these are surface idols.
Now, surface idols are those that are on the surface of our lives.
They're the outward expression of a root idol.
So for example, a surface idol is, I have to have a particular kind of look or body image.
That's image idolatry, right?
We all know this is not bad to care about our bodies.
First Corinthians,
6, 1 Corinthians 9, 1 Timothy 4, talk about the value of taking care of ourselves.
We understand that.
It's a good thing.
There's nothing wrong with wanting to be in shape.
There's nothing wrong with wanting to be healthy.
But the problem is it makes a really lousy God, right?
Because so much of who we are is determined by our genes that we don't have a say in.
The second one is a work idolatry.
I'm highly productive and I get a lot done.
Again, the scripture says that we are supposed to be hard workers.
The Bible discusses the value and the importance of being productive and working hard.
In verses like in Colossians 3 and Proverbs 14 and Ephesians 5 and Matthew 6.
But the issue is when your identity is completely wrapped up in getting things done.
It becomes who you are.
Right?
And your identity is associated with work, only work.
And you take pride in being highly productive and getting lots of stuff done, which is a great thing, but it can go too far.
Right?
The issue is when your identity is found and being able to get things done, and when that becomes the ultimate part of your life, you're showing up to the wrong altar.
Another one is helping idolatry.
People are dependent on me and they need me.
It's good to feel needed.
I like to feel needed.
I like to think that the work that I do is a necessary kind of work.
I like to think that it helps people.
I like to think that hopefully it adds some joy to people's lives or some comfort to people's lives.
We all have an innate need to be needed.
But that can go too far.
to where, again, your entire personality, the entire part of your being is wrapped up in, people need me.
People need to be dependent on me.
People need me to be there.
And so you can't let anything go.
You can't turn over the keys.
Your desire to be needed overwhelms everything else.
These are convicting.
The fourth is I have a certain level of wealth, financial freedom, and very nice possessions.
And we all know, and I'm not going to beat this horse to death yet.
I'll do that later in this sermon.
But materialism, idolatry, I mean, we live in it, right?
I think I read an article that said the average home in the United States has over 200,000 pieces in it of stuff.
I got stuff in my garage in boxes lined almost to the ceiling.
I couldn't even tell you what is in any of those boxes.
If somebody came to me and said, hey, I think I left such and such in a box out there, it would literally take me all week to go through all the boxes of the junk that's in my garage to find what it is that they might be looking for.
I mean, we have and love our possessions.
And we always think, you know, I might need that little ruler that I found at a garage sale for a nickel 25 years ago.
So I'm going to carry it with me for the rest of my life.
Well, family idolatry, my children and or my parents are happy and they are happy with me.
You know, family is probably one of the biggest.
tricks that Satan uses, right?
Because it's such a good thing.
You know, we'll take our kid to travel sports and, you know, he won't be able to go to church on Sunday for, you know, sick for years because he's gonna be playing games every Sunday.
And it's such a good idea that, oh man, in the rationalizations can flow from there.
Oh man, I'm doing a good thing here.
This is a good thing for my kid.
You know, and I'm not telling you how to raise your kids because, you know, I've, I get it, man.
It's the hardest job in the entire world is to raise a child.
But we have to be careful as moms and dads that our children don't become our idols.
You can have relationship idolatry, right?
Mr or Mrs.
Right is in love with me.
And that gives my life purpose and that gives my life meaning.
You know, I heard about a fellow that,
I went to talk to his rabbi and he said, Rabbi, I have a strong desire to live for eternity.
The rabbi says, well, that's easy.
Just get married.
And he says, it's really that simple that that would allow me to live forever.
And the rabbi said, not really, but the desire will disappear.
And so we can have a relationship idolatry.
We can have achievement idolatry, which is very prevalent in our culture today.
America loves winners.
We celebrate them.
We commercialize them.
We write books about them.
I mean, probably, in fact, we're so infatuated with it.
There's probably a good number of people in this room,
including me that couldn't tell you who the losing team was in the Super Bowl last year, or who the losing team was in the NCAA basketball tournament, right?
Because we were so focused on celebrating winners that achievement can become an idol.
And then we can have a suffering idolatry, which says, my life only has meaning or I only have worth if I'm hurting.
or in a problem.
Only then do I feel worthy or loved.
Only then do I feel like I'm able to deal with guilt when I'm suffering.
You know, these things can slip into our lives.
And I would imagine that if these eight, you've probably seen at least some warning signs in some of them for your own life, as I know I did for mine.
You know, none of us sit here and actively think of the phrase, my life only has meaning or I only have worth or value if I fill in the blank.
Instead, right, it's the way that we live our lives that reveals the throne on our heart.
We don't sit there and say my life only has meaning and value if I have a new car or a new phone or if I'm dressed in the latest fashion.
Instead, we just drive ourselves into debt over stuff that doesn't ultimately matter.
And in doing so, we reveal what's on the throne of our heart.
But everything I listed here is a surface idol.
What are some of the real root idols?
Well, some of the root idols are these.
Comfort idolatry, power idolatry, approval idolatry,
and control idolatry.
Comfort idolatry says, my life has meaning or value if I have this kind of pleasure or experience or a particular quality of life.
It's no surprise that if you worship a comfort idol, that comfort is the thing that you want.
They want privacy.
They want a lack of stress.
They want freedom.
And this oftentimes
comes across as being really laid back and easy going, but it's at the cost of any kind of productivity because their greatest nightmare is encountering stress or demands.
Now, maybe you're thinking, well, that's good.
That's not me, but hold on, I'll get to you.
But for the person who worships comfort, that's the worst.
Stress and demands.
That's the big nightmare.
But here's the thing, right?
is that it often leaves others feeling neglected and hurt.
Because when we're lazy above all else, when we pay the price of productivity for comfort, somebody else always gets hurt because they feel like they don't matter.
When I say I'll get around to that sometime and then I never get around to it, it makes people feel like they don't matter.
And the biggest problem of motion
that these people experience is boredom because we're not designed to sit around and do nothing all day every day.
The Bible says, Satan loves idle hands.
Colossians says, whatever you do, work hardly, ask for the Lord and not from in, knowing that from the Lord, you will receive the inheritance as your reward.
You are serving the Lord Christ.
We all believers, we glorify God by how we live our lives for Him.
and not allowing the enemy to take a foothold in boredom.
And it's more than just relationships that suffer.
It's also our work that suffers.
They get taken in conversations, being exposed and vulnerable.
They bounce from person to person, never getting into a relationship that's any deeper than the surface level because they want their comfort above all else.
Comfort makes a terrible God.
The power idolatry is my life only has meaning if I have power and influence over others.
This is a sneaky one too.
Worshiping success, winning, gaining influence.
And more than not, these worshipers are willing to pay the burden of responsibility.
They'll say, I'll bear it.
I'll go through the trenches.
I'll handle it.
If I can get more success,
then I'll handle it and sacrifice anything for it.
So we become willing to pay that price and that weight of responsibility to the point that the major fear becomes humiliation.
When you worship success, it's not just about winning.
It's about not losing.
And the more times that more times than not results in other people feeling used or manipulated,
Because you use people as a means for your own power and your own success and your own ability to control other people or try to control other people.
Worshiping success makes you feel like their relationship with you is just necessary to help you get where you need to go.
And when you get to where you need to go, then you can discard those relationships from the past.
This guy here on the
with the Philadelphia, ugly Philadelphia Eagles uniform.
He went to another high school than I did, but it was our main rival.
So this guy's name is Bobby Taylor.
So Bobby Taylor was 1992.
He graduated from Longview High School.
Longview High School was the main rival, and you're gonna gasp when you hear the name of my high school, but you have to remember I went to high school in the South,
My high school was Robert E. Lee High School.
And we played Longview.
And I remember, man, as a freshman, we hear about this kid, Bobby Taylor.
And we get out there, and we're doing our little warm-ups.
And we're bebop in the line, and we're shooting lay-ups and stuff.
And this guy comes out as a freshman and does a 360 slam dunk in warm-ups.
And at that point, I knew that all my power was gone, right?
By the time he gets to be a senior, he is the Texas State 6A football and basketball player of the year, has a scholarship to play at Notre Dame, both basketball and football, but winds up in football,
and becomes an all-pro-cornerback for the Philadelphia Eagles.
I mean, he was absolutely the best athlete I have ever seen in my life.
He was totally different.
And we knew we had to compete against him and we knew we were gonna lose.
But the Bible doesn't forbid competition, right?
But our drive for success can get out of whack.
And so there's also approval, idolatry.
This says, my life only has worth or value if I am loved and respected.
We want affirmation.
We want relationship.
We want love.
But the cost of it is independence.
We become so dependent on others and their approval of us.
And that's where we get our worth in life, that our greatest fear becomes rejection.
And as such, they'll make others feel smothered because they can't
humanly love you the way that God can love you.
It can take the shape of people pleasing.
You know, maybe with one group, you say, that's a great idea.
And then you get another group and they have a different idea and you say, yeah, those bozos over there, you wouldn't believe what they were saying, right?
At the end of the day, you have to sleep with the knowledge that, you know what, I really disagree with that.
But if I voice my opinion, then I'm going to lose their approval.
And if I lose their approval, well, what if they don't like me anymore?
And then the final one is control idolatry.
And this one's a bad one too.
My life only has worth their value if I'm able to get mastery over it in a particular area.
Those who worship control, you guessed it, seek control.
More specifically,
You may find yourself seeking self-discipline, certainty, standards.
These thoughts have prepared everything for the trip.
I know the weather for every day of the week, down to the hour, and I'll have everything that I need.
Where I've read all the articles I could find about going to the beach, and someone died at the same beach we're going to, and now I'm not gonna get in the water.
In fact, I don't think anybody should get in the water.
Or no one will ever be in any danger.
Danger will not exist in this family.
Is this all consuming desire to control everything?
And what others come away with is they often feel condemned or judged or offended and it results in loneliness, right?
If you can't let go the idea that you are in control of everything, then you will wind up alone because everybody will eventually leave.
A phrase that so commonly comes out of the mouth of a control worshiper is if you would only just, right?
If you'd only just get your act together, then that wouldn't have happened.
But at the heart of the matter is they worry and it's a vicious cycle because worry leads to seeking to control things, but then ultimately we can't, we realize we can't control things.
And so we start to worry about it again.
which leads us to control it again, which leads us right back into the cycle and it just repeats itself over and over and over.
So what's the cure for idolatry?
The cure in Exodus 32 was fast and it was severe.
It said that Moses burned the calf and grounded the powder and scattered it in the water and made the Israelites drink it.
You know why he made him drink it?
I think he made him drink it because he was saying to them, you think this satisfies and fills your hunger.
All right then, eat it and tell me.
Does it satisfy your hunger the way that God does?
There's a call for cleansing there.
In 1 Corinthians 10, he says, there is no testing that has taken you that is not common to everyone, but God is faithful and he will not allow you to be tested
beyond your strengths, but will with the testing also provide a way out so that you may be able to endure it.
And immediately on the heels of that verse, he says, therefore my friends flee from the worship of idols.
Now we oftentimes read the first part of verse 13, but not the second part of verse 13, right?
This passage is talking about idolatry.
And we often apply it to people who suffer and we tell them, well, you know, God says he won't put more on you than you can bear without providing an escape route.
Well, that's not true.
God will absolutely put more on you than you can bear.
That is not what the Bible teaches.
He does that because not because he's sadistic.
or anything like that, he does that because he is going to deliver us and when he delivers us, he wants us to know beyond the shadow of it out that it was him who did it.
If our ushers would come forward and begin to pass out the elements for the Lord's Supper, you know, the first thing that we have to do is not allow that altar to be built.
And that's why we need Christian community.
Remember that they resorted to idolatry because they thought that Moses, who represented the presence of God, wasn't coming back.
And that temptation is the same for us.
When we get out of Christian community, then we can easily become tempted to think that God is not going to hear from me anymore, that God has left me.
He has deserted me.
But when we are in Christian community, it's a lot, we begin to experience the presence of God on a more regular basis.
Why?
Because we're hanging around where the action is happening.
Right?
I mean, if I play in right field, I don't have to, I'm not gonna get every ball hit to me in right field, but I'm gonna get some of them, but I'm sure not gonna be able to play right field if I don't even show up at the ballpark.
Now listen, the live stream is a great thing and I think it's a wonderful and a lot of people listen to it and a lot of people that can't be here in person are able to watch it online when they're traveling or whatever and that's a great thing.
I mean in general, our culture has devalued the idea of the importance of Christian community and you have literally hundreds of thousands, if not millions of people out there
who do not see a reason to gather with other believers on Sunday.
And yeah, you can download the best preachers and you can download this and that and you can create your own little custom worship service at home.
But the Christian life is designed to be lived in Christian community.
And the way to keep those idols off the throne of your life is to be in fellowship with other believers who can see the idols when you're blind to them.
It's as simple as that.
John White said in his book, The Golden Calf, he said, we have overvalued these calves that we worship and we have underestimated and taken for granted and forgotten the God of power that we love and profess to worship.
Psalm 106, 21 says, they worship the golden calf because they forgot God.
Listen friends, as we get ready to take the Lord's Supper today,
The Lord's Supper is a reminder as we take it in community that God has promised.
Jesus is coming back.
He is coming back as the victorious King.
He is coming back as our Lord and our Savior.
That trumpet is going to sound and people are going to rise up out of their graves and it is going to be the greatest thing, right?
Because God does what He says He's going to do.
But until that day,
We ought to constantly examine ourselves.
Are there any of these idols that I need to get off the throne of my life that I need to remove so that God is placed in his correct position?
I want you to take a moment and analyze, contemplate your own life and where you're at in this.
No judgment, it's not an exercise designed to beat anybody down.
It simply is that we're in community.
We have a moment of quietness without our cell phones going off every 13 seconds or whatever, and we're able to examine ourselves.
And I just want to give you a minute to do that before we take the Lord's Supper.
Taking the bread, Jesus said, this is my body, which is broken for you.
Do this in remembrance of me.
Taking the cup, Jesus said, this is my blood, which is spilled for the forgiveness of sin.
You need to do business with God.
The worship team is going to come and lead us in a song.
You pray where you're at.
You grab somebody and pray with them.
You come to the altar and pray.
You do the business with God that he has called you to do today.
Let's pray.
Father, we thank you, God, for your goodness, for your mercy, and for your grace.
We're going to help us not to worship idols.
Not to worship comfort or approval or power or control God.
You are on the throne of our hearts and that is where you belong.
So mold us and shape us God for it's in Christ's name we pray.
Amen.